Tena koutou katoa. Nga mihi ma ke tenei huihui, i tenei
ata.
Thank you very much everybody for your attendance today.
We are now starting the formal part of the day with regards
to our role as the Maori Affairs Select Committee
of Parliament itself. But first of all, thank you very much for the
mihi pakatone.
It's a very warm welcome to such a beautiful place that
you have here itself. And one of the treasures that we have as a
committee is to be able to get around the country and come to
places, to your whenua, and to enjoy your hospitality, but
also to see sometimes places that we've never been before.
And that's myself on this occasion.
This is the first time I've had the opportunity to be here, and I can tell you
I was excited to come, and I'm pleased that I have come.
So thank you for the very warm welcome to your whenua here
itself. So today, the process here is, is that
we as a select committee, we are here to hear from
those who submitted to the process of
this treaty settlement that we have in front of us here.
It is usual for us to hear those that are in support
of the treaty settlement, but it's not unusual for us to hear from people that
actually are not in support of the treaty settlement for whatever reason
they may have. So today is about us gaining a better
understanding of what the submissions are that are
coming towards us to take into account when we deliberate on
behalf of the settlement. Clearly, there's been
a long, you might argue, arduous timeframe
of actually getting it to this point here.
But nevertheless, this particular stage is an important
one for the Crown, because what we are talking about here is
creating law,
and law binds everybody towards it, including the Crown.
And I take words of some of the submissions here.
The settlement itself is the beginning of a
rebuild of an iwi of Ngā Pu,
of different places that we attend itself.
So we are very keen to hear from the submitters.
Today, we are looking at hearing from five parties
today. It's our convention that we always
start with the negotiating group to open up the
proceedings, but we also, as for fairness,
is to allow them to close up at some time at the end as well.
That's what we've always done as a committee, and we feel that that is a fair way.
We will also be having a hearing in Wellington also.
So there are some people that couldn't make their way to here today,
and for fairness, we want to make sure they have the opportunity also.
So we will be conducting a hearing in Wellington in a short time
as well. So the proceedings here, our convention,
everything is largely convention with regards to select committees, is that we
generally give groups 10 minutes to present and
individuals five minutes to present.
And we like to allow a bit of time for some questions as well
within those time frames. We've only got a short number today, so
as the Chair, I'll be a little bit flexible, but we do still have a
time to get by. And please excuse me if I have to
interrupt and move on to questions or to close the submission off at
that time. So aroha mai.
Now, we have a number of people that are present with us today that are
from Wellington and other places as well.
And of course, we heard from Matia, who spoke earlier on,
and Matia is here to help us with translation.
Not all of us are fluent in Te Reo. Some of us are, but not all of us are,
so it's very important that we understand, particularly if you wish
to use Te Reo in your presentation, and that's
absolutely accepted. Absolutely.
So we have a number of other staff from Te Tari Pakatone, from the Ministry of
Treaty Settlements, but also from our parliamentary services
staff who help us out as a committee to make sure.
There's now a bit of formality here.
It is a recorded meeting, so we record the meeting.
It's not Zoom, is it? It's actually just a recording today.
Obviously, usually we would actually have it publicly available.
This is a public meeting, so people are allowed to
come in here. Unless I feel that an individual or a grouping are
causing disruption to our process and not adding constructively to it,
then I have a role as Chair to manage that.
I've never had to do that, and I hope I don't have to do that
today. And it's also convention. You'll see that we've got a couple of
helpers here with Henare and also Jeff
for security. That's normal for us.
Parliamentary services who have a responsibility of looking after the
welfare of us all, but including the members of Parliament,
we just need to make sure that we've got ourselves being kept safe as well.
Our staff came here yesterday, and
apparently they moved these tables around a number of different ways to try and get
the best positioning to be able to conduct this.
So thank you to the staff for the work you've done, and I'm
sure it will work fine. So with that,
let me make sure there's nothing else I need to say.
I think I've covered most of it itself. Thank you once again.
We look very much forward to hearing what you have.
And first up, as I said before, we've got Te Pari
Taupoki, who have been doing the negotiations and all
that, and we'll open with your submission to begin with. So aroha.
Kia ora koutou.
So I'm submitting on behalf of the
Te Pari Taupoki, which isA
trust established
to receive the Deed of Settlement on behalf of Ngāti
Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana.
Ngāti Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana Settlement Trust submits
strong support of the Ngāti Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana Claims
Settlement Bill,
and urges the Justice Committee
to recommend that it's passed without amendment.
This settlement has been a long time coming,
going on 40 years.
Our people have waited generations for the Crown to acknowledge
what the Crown did to our people. The Deed of
Settlement represents a hard-won
negotiated
agreement made in good faith,
and the bill gives it legal effect.
We ask Parliament to honor that agreement.
The trust was established specifically to receive the settlement and hold its
benefits in trust
for current and future generations
of Ngāti Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana.
We are ready, our governance is in place,
and our pathway towards it
is prepared, and our people are waiting.
The historical account in the Deed records plainly and permanently
the serious Crown wrongs
committed against Ngāti Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana.
These include armed Crown attacks onto Kōpani and Onepoto in the
1860s.
Its scorched earth tactics that destroyed our kaimei food
supplies.
Coercive and unlawful land dealings that stripped
Ngāti Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana
of our
Waikarimoana lands
under pressure and duress.
Broken promises of self-government under the Te Urewera
Reserve arrangements.
And decades of dispossession that left our people virtually
landless and severed from our ancestral rohe.
The Crown's
formal acknowledgments and apology in the Deed
recognizes these breaches of the Treaty of Waitangi and the
profound harms they caused.
Loss of life, loss of land, cultural dislocation, and
long-term socioeconomic damage across generations.
That is not simply a legal formality.
The public record and apology are vital for our people.
They validate the lived experience of our
kaumatua and confirm the truth of what happened.
They acknowledge the intergenerational harm,
trauma
that continues to affect our whānau today.
They provide a foundation for
restoring honor and building a just,
ongoing relationship between the Crown and Ngāti Rūpani Mai
Waikarimoana.
Most importantly, this history,
told and recorded by us, becomes a permanent record.
Our mokopuna will always know who they are, where they come from,
and why this redress matters.
The cultural redress in this settlement is significant and in
important respects unique.
The transfer of lands into Te Urewera reflects a clear and
principled shift away from the Crown's model of private
ownership
to a framework that recognizes Te Urewera as a legal entity in its
own right,
and affirms Ngāti Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana's role as kaitiaki,
which has always been a truth.
Our mana and kaitiakitanga over this rohe were
never extinguished.
They were suppressed by Crown actions.
The Te Urewera Act model corrects that.
Whakapapa becomes the legal foundation for access, use, and
responsibility,
entirely consistent with how our tūpuna
understood and exercised authority over this rohe since
time immemorial.
The settlement also transfers specific sites, including
Turiōkahu and Kaitawa,
as Crown properties into Te Urewera.
These sites provide places for housing and reconnection to our whānau.
The governance arrangements
embed our decision-making and tikanga alongside
statutory protections,
enabling conservation, visitor use, and community
needs to be managed together
in a way that reflects our values.
In short, the settlement gives legal expression
to what has always been
true, that Ngāti Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana, as a hapū of Tūhoe,
holds responsibilities of kaitiakitanga within Te Urewera.
It
creates a durable framework for that authority to be exercised,
recognized, and honored into the future.
Ngāti Rūpani Mai Waikarimoana is a hapū of Tūhoe.
That whakapapa relationship is not administrative, it is who we
are.
It defines our identity, our obligations to this rohe,
and the tikanga under which we exercise our kaitiakitanga within
Te Urewera.
Our relationship with Tūhoe is one of whanaungatangaAnd it's
from that foundation that we act as tangata whenua of Waipara
Moana.
To who have supported this settlement,
that support is not incidental. It reflects a shared whakapapa
understanding of the responsibilities and authority that belong to the people of
this rohe.
It is that living relationship, not administrative
structures, that will continue to guide
how we care for Waipara Moana and Te Irurewa.
As required by the Treaty settlement process, we engaged with all
neighboring iwi throughout the negotiation of this settlement.
Those conversations were conducted in
good faith
and are a matter of record.
Where the iwi have raised concerns about this settlement, we acknowledge those
views
while respectfully disagreeing.
Our authority over this rohe is grounded in whakapapa and in the
continuity of our presence and responsibilities as ahika.
That is not a position we arrive at through negotiation.
It is not one we will depart from.
Other iwi have had the opportunity through the Treaty settlement process to achieve
redress to their claims.
We do not accept that our settlement is the appropriate vehicle
for relitigating their outcomes.
Financial and commercial redress.
The trust acknowledges honestly that
no financial settlement can fully compensate for the scale of
what was taken from Ngati Ruapani Mai Waipara Moana.
The losses of land
and of economic capacity across generations cannot be
reduced to a dollar figure.
What the financial and commercial redress does provide is a
foundation.
It gives us the tools to begin rebuilding
the economic strength and prosperity our people had
before being disenfranchised from our lands
and customary rights.
The trust is prepared to deploy these assets purposefully,
to grow them into jobs, services, and intergenerational wealth for
our people.
Partners have been identified, plans are in place,
and we will report transparently on outcomes to our iwi.
The settlement does not end our journey.
It begins
the rebuilding.
We wish to speak plainly to the committee about what continued delay means
for our people.
We have carried this hurt for too long.
The weight of unresolved historical grievance has worn down our values,
our beliefs, and our relationships with one another.
Each year of inaction
brings more disconnection from our rohe,
more lost opportunities to invest in our whanau and rangatahi,
a deeper harm to the wairua of our community.
Our kaumatua have waited their whole lives,
and many have passed away now.
Whole lives for this acknowledgment.
Our rangatahi deserve to inherit a settlement, empowered identity,
and not a legacy of unresolved grievance.
The bill is the first essential step toward that restoration.
Passing it now means we can begin the real work.
Healing relationships, restoring kaitiakitanga over Waipara
Moana, strengthening our whanau well-being, and building a
stable future.
Further delay will deepen the harm.
There is no benefit for the Crown or to our people in
prolonging the process.
The Ngati Ruapani Mai Waipara Moana Settlement Trust respectfully requests
that the Justice Committee
recommend that the Ngati Ruapani Mai Waipara Moana Claims Settlement Bill
be passed without amend,
acknowledging its report, the significance of the historical record,
and Crown apology to the people of Ngati Ruapani Mai Waipara Moana.
Prioritize the bill's passage so that the work of restoration and
rebuilding can begin without further delay.
Yeah.
I will
take a couple of short questions if there are any now, but understanding we'll have
another opportunity at the end of our hearing to ask further questions.
But are there any immediate questions that we have from members at this time?
Kei
te pai.
Yeah?
Ripeka.
These questions from the floor.
Are you asking a question?
Yes.
Unfortunately, well, the process is here for us to ask
questions. We don't turn into cross-examination.
I meant is Ripeka part of one of the other submissions?
She's part of our submission.
Yeah, so you'll get an opportunity to talk to what you wish to then, okay?
So but with regards, thank you very much, Kara, for that
verbal submission itself, and we'll be seeing you again later on. So thank you.
Kia ora.
So we'll move now to Ngati Ruapani Ki Uta ki Tai
Co-op and Dr. Rapata Wiri.
Tena koe.
Kia ora koutou.
So Rapata,
we've
got
10 minutes allocated there.
Kia ora.
So you use that how you see fit. We have had the opportunity to read the written
submission, but you use the time as you wish to. Kia ora.
My name is Dr. Rapata Wiri, and I speak on behalf of
Ngati Ruapani Ki Uta ki Tai Cooperative
Society.
I am one of seven directors.
We were set up under the Companies Act to unify all
Ngati Ruapani from Waikaremoana to Wairoa
to Gisborne, because our tipuna Ruapani is actually
from Gisborne.
The current submitters, Te Whare Taupoki,
represent Ngati Ruapani mai Waikaremoana,
affectionately referred to by Alistair Best in
his book, "Tuhou:
Children of the Mist."
We represent Ngati Ruapani ki
Waikaremoana
who are effectively
the children who got missed out.
So the difference between mai Waikaremoana
and ki Waikaremoana
is fundamental
to this proposed bill.
First, we vehemently
oppose the proposed bill passed on the fact that its
foundations,
its framework, are seriously flawed.
In particular, I draw your attention to Te Whare Taupoki
submission which states that Ngati Ruapani is a
hapu of Tuhou.
We have proven beyond all reasonable doubt in the Waitangi
Tribunal hearing of 2004 that Ngati
Ruapani are not a hapu of Tuhou.
Ruapani,
this lodge here, was named after Ruapani
as a male ancestor from Gisborne who came here.
He's six generations from the waka Horouta
which landed in Gisborne.
Kia ora.
Tuhou comes from another waka called
Matatua.
Tuhou
comes from Whakatane.
Kia ora.
So there is no whakapapa connection-
Kia ora
... between Ruapani and Tuhou.
Ae.
So from the outset, the
submission by Te Whare Taupoki is flawed in terms of its
own whakapapa.
To clarify, there are two entities at the core of this debate.
This settlement, proposed settlement only caters for those
Ruapani who whakapapa to Tuhou,
and does not cater for those Ruapani who
whakapapa to Kahungunu to all the land in between here and
Wairoa to Gisborne,
and who have land rights in the six blocks that are being transferred to
Te Urewera Board,
which is a Tuhou board.
That's what's proposed under this bill.
Therefore, this bill must be urgently
halted.
This bill is inconsistent with the Crown's treaty obligations of active
protection
and good faith.
The whakapapa and history of the submitters,
Te Whare Taupoki, who I've just discovered are the PSGE, we
had no idea they're going to receive this $24 million
plus the six blocks of land,
is incorrect
and it is Tuhou centric.
By passing this bill, you are validating false whakapapa
and a fabricated history
of Ngati Ruapani mai Waikaremoana, which is essentially a
Tuhou biased history.
Kia ora.
Even the Maori translation
of this report is Tuhou biased. It's written in
the Tuhou dialect.
We oppose the bill
vehemently as we argue that false whakapapa
and false historical accounts cannot be validated by the
Crown
or its agencies or by its
ministers.
In their whakapapa and historical accounts which are documented in this
settlement,
the history of Ruapani,
Ngati Ruapani, is confused and influenced by an
ideology called Te Mana Motuhake o
Tuhou
which states, believes that Ngati Ruapani is a hapu of Tuhou,
fought alongside Tuhou to define this beautiful Te Urewera,
Te Rohe Pōtae o Tuhou,
the Urewera District Native Reserve in 1896.
However, if you read their historical account, the history that
they have written
fails to acknowledge that Ngati Ruapani withdrew from Te
Rohe Pōtae o Tuhou in 1899.
We withdrew,
and we formed our own Mana Motuhake
as Ruapani in 1899 and again
in 1917 with the Urewera Consolidation Scheme
when we formed the reserves. The 12 reserves up at Lake Waikaremoana
are only for Ngati Ruapani ki Waikaremoana.
Tuturu Ngati Ruapani. 317
Ngati Ruapani
owners.
We have a list of owners.
I have argued before the Maori Land Court last year when
the submitters, the
guy who did your pohiri this morning, said that the meeting house
up the land, the marae up here belongs to Tuhou.
Well, I objected to that
based on the fact that Te Mana Motuhake o Tuhou is
nothing more than ideological mumbo
jumboTherefore, the whakapapa and
historical account presented by Te Whare Taupoki must not be
validated by the select committee.
I ask the select committee to pause.
Kaiwhakahawe. We oppose the transfer of the six
blocks
to Te Urewera Board
and argue that this bill contradicts Tikanga Māori.
And I refer to case law.
Case law, the Supreme Court, the case of Pakinekora
and Te Kaunihera Kaumatua o Tūhoe versus Te Wī
Taumataua in 2023,
where the Supreme Court ruled that Tikanga cannot be its
own judge.
This is a Supreme Court decision,
therefore breach of Tikanga cannot be
validated by this select committee.
This bill is also a breach of tino rangatiratanga guaranteed in Article
2nd of the Treaty,
and
mana motuhake,
which Mr Trader Tate and I, my uncle,
argued before the Constitutional Kaupapa Inquiry in Palmerston North
last year.
You can read our evidence at pages 31 and 32 of the
draft report of the Constitutional Kaupapa Inquiry,
where we rejected
the constitutional legitimacy of unilateral Crown
sovereignty,
which allows laws such as this proposed
bill to be passed without consultation.
This proposed bill creates enduring
legal prejudice.
We also oppose the bill because the Crown has relied on one
group's mandate,
Ngati Ruapani mai Waikaremoana, the Children of the Mist.
The Crown has failed to properly resolve
overlapping claims with our whanau, with our hapu,
and the six blocks that have been transferred to
Te Urewera Board.
This is inconsistent with tribunal guidance that overlapping
interests must be properly addressed,
not overridden or ignored as some sort of intertribal
dispute.
In that submission, Te Whare Taupoki
claims that the history is plain and permanent.
However, we argue that the history is not as plain and permanent and
simple as they might lead you to believe.
The historical account they have provided is very much an
unsettled history.
The historical account is Tūhoe-centric.
Tūhoe-centric.
Tūhoe bias
treats Ngati Ruapani as a hapu. We are not a hapu of
Tūhoe. We are an iwi in our own right.
The historical account has not been agreed upon by all
affected parties. You heard I read the submissions from
our cousins from Ngati Kahungunu,
Tatau-Tatau.
Karahora. Karahora. We have one here who's going to give evidence
today.
At risk of becoming legislated history,
this creates a dangerous precedent because disputed
historical narratives
become permanently embedded in law,
and I believe in the rule of law.
I gained a Master of Laws from Victoria University.
I don't believe in the law of the jungle. I believe in the rule of law.
We oppose the bill because Te Urewera Board and land
authority issues.
There are issues with the board. The bill
embeds redress within Te Urewera framework,
effectively reinforcing Tūhoe governance structures,
limits recognition of other iwi authorities and
PSTEs such as Tatau-Tatau.
It locks in a fabricated interpretation of mana whenua,
and that is based on
lies
and the manipulation of whakapapa.
Dr. Witty, could you just point out any new outcomes?
We've sort of covered a little bit that you-
Yeah
... a bit repetitive, but if you could just point out-
Okay
... any new stuff you've got there.
So, just very quickly.
So we've been denied equal recognition.
We're structurally excluded. The prejudice is severe and
irreversible,
and the bill will cause permanent loss of mana whenua,
loss of treaty claim rights, distortion of whakapapa, and entrenchment of
incorrect historical narratives.
If I may just talk briefly about delay.
Very briefly, yes.
Very briefly. Te Whare Taupoki argues that delay will cause us harm.
We oppose this because we believe that a rushed settlement will create a flawed
settlement, and a flawed settlement will cause far greater
harm than any delay. Recommendations,
and I close up here.
Yeah.
We respectfully request that this bill will not and cannot proceed in its
current form.
We request that an independent review of whakapapa
assertions, historical account, mandate, and agreement in principle.
We request genuine engagement with Ngati Ruapani
ki Waikaremoana claimants and community,
as well as Tatau-Tatau and other affected
PSTEsWe respectfully urge the
select committee to delay
and pause the progress of the bill
until these concerns have been independently examined
and resolved.
A treaty settlement founded upon unresolved
grievances cannot deliver true and enduring
justice.
We are not opposed to treaty settlements,
but we urge the select committee
to pause
on passing this bill
in order to make the foundations of this treaty settlement
more solid,
more robust,
more transparent,
and fairer for everyone concerned.
Kia ora.
Ngā mihi.
Thank you very much.
Just before you move off this, are there any questions of Dr.
Ruby?
Yes. Steve?
Hey, got a question.
Steve.
Yeah.
Kia ora.
Kia
ora.
I appreciate that.
You would know from the legal process around these settlements that
the effect of the
Māori Affairs Select Committee's responsibility
is to formalize
a deed of settlement that's been already signed.
And
traditionally, it's
peculiar or unusual to delay this, so
you're making the case for an exceptional circumstance.
Obviously, there's often disagreement within iwi about whether
a settlement should be made, whether it's sufficient, and we understand,
we are acutely aware at least that, I feel acutely, the divisive character
of settlements often. It's why I've just stood market want to, because
I've circulated that divisive settlement processes.
Mm-hmm.
I wonder if
understanding your
profoundly expressed concerns,
do you think there's a version of meaningful
amendments that could be made that would resolve them, or is it really
the fundamental character of it which places Maere
Ruapani as a part of Tuhoe
when you believe that Ruapani should be as
independent to Tuhoe?
The settlement should be separate from any association with the Tuhoe reo.
So I feel like that was really a clarification for understanding.
I think you made it pretty clear.
Yeah. Thank you.
Kia ora.
Okay. That's order.
Kush? Kushal?
Tena koe, otirā, tēnā tatou katoa kua huihui mai i tēnei rā.
You mentioned the requirement for clarification of whakapapa.
Yes.
And I think we can all agree that that is not the role of the Crown or this select
committee. How do you envisage that happening, that process, and who might that
group be?
I think there needs to be meaningful engagement between Ngati
Ruapani mai i Waikaremoana or te whare kaupiki
and Ngati Ruapani ki Waikaremoana and tatou
katoa
to address those overlapping issues of whakapapa.
They haven't been meaningfully
discussed.
And Ira will
talk more about that. That korero hasn't occurred.
So you
need a period of time, you're requesting a period of time for an independent
process driven by respective hapu iwi.
Aye.
What might that timeframe be?
Six months.
Kia ora.
Tena koe. Any last questions of Dr.?
Kia ora, Doctor. Thank you very much for your impassioned submission.
We appreciate it.
Thank you.
And I think you've given us a lot of thought
to be considered in our deliberations we're heading into.
Kia ora.
Kia ora mai.
Kia ora koutou.
Okay. Can we now move to Tāhuri o te Rangi,
Traynor Tate?
Tena koe.
Kia ora koutou.
Traynor, we actually have you down for-
Sorry, I'm a bit-
Sorry. We actually have you down for five minutes as an individual, but
like I said before, I'll be a little bit flexible.
But, we've had the opportunity to read your written submission.
So you point out the key points you want us to understand.
So kia ora mai.
Kia ora. I don't think it's going to last more than five minutes, but however,
opposition to the bill.
I'm sorry, I've written everything in te reo.
Hey, ae.
Hei, hei te pai.
Okay.
Nā tēnei pire e tono ana kia uru mai te
papahātepai ki te whakahaere mō Te Urewera.
He tino māharahara tēnei.
He hoki whakamuri tēnei. He whakahokinga mai i te
mana ki te karauna.
He whakaiti i te mana o te tangata whenua.
Kāore tēnei i te hāngai ki te wairua o Te Urewera hei
tangata. Kāore hoki i te hāngai ki te whakaaro o te
rangatiratanga. Rangatiratanga and whakapapa.
He uri
nō tēnei whenua. He tino māharahara ana ahau
i te whakaiti i te mana o te tangata whenua.
Ko ngā whakatau mō Te Urewera, me noho ki te
hunga i whai whakapapa ana ki a ia.
Kāore he tikaKia nekeia atu
taua mana ki te Crown.
Via representation. Nei tētahi take nui.
Kāore he māngai mō te rohe o Wairoa ki runga i te
poari o Te Urewera.
Kāore he reo. Ahakoa ngā hononga whakapapa,
ahakoa ngā kōrero tuku iho, kāore
mātou i te tēpi.
Kāore e tika kia whakarere kēhia te
hānganga
mēnā kāore anō kia whakatikahia
tēnei raru.
Te Tiriti o Waitangi. E pā ana hoki tēnei ki Te
Tiriti o Waitangi. Kei hea te rangatiratanga,
te whakawhanaungatanga,
te tiakitanga o te mana whenua?
Ki ahau nei kāore e kitea ana i tēnei
pire.
I roto i ō mātou hapori,
kei reira tonu ngā mamae o mua.
Ngā wā i tangohia ai te mana, ngā wā
kāore mātou i rango.
Ae, kei te kite anō mātou i aua āhuatanga i roto
i tēnei pire.
Ko tāku nei i hiahia.
Nō reira, e te komiti, kaua e whakaae
ki tēnei pire i tēnei āhua, engari
whakaritea he māngai mō te rohe o
Wairoa. Waiho te mana whakahaere ki te tangata
whenua.
Whai i ngā mātāpono o Te Tiriti o
Waitangi.
Hei whakakaci i tēnei kōrero,
ko Te Urewera ehara i te rawa, he tangata, he tipuna.
Ko
mātou ngā uri. Kei a mātou te kawenata ki te
tiaki i a ia.
Kāore au e whakaae kia
whakaitihia tōna mana.
Kua mutu taku kōrero.
Mēnā ka whakaitihia Te Urewera,
ka whakaitihia hoki mātou. Kāore mātou e whakaae ki
tēnā. Nō reira,
tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou. Kia ora tātou katoa.
Kia ora.
We'll just go to Kushla for a question.
Tēnā koe. Kei te rongo koe?
Yeah. Okay.
Tēnā koe mō o kōrero i tēnei ata. He anō ra,
mehemea ka uru atu tētahi nō te Wairoa ki runga i tēnei
poari, arā ka noho tētahi o te Wairoa ki te tēpū, me kī,
ka tautoko koe i tēnei pire?
Kare e taea te aukatia ki a rātou e honohono rawa ō rātou ki a
mātou i kōnei i Whakaaru Moana, i runga rā i ngā temata o te whenua.
Kare taea te aukatia atu i ō rātou whenua kei te whakatuke ki ētahi atu.
Nō reira, mēnā ka whai tūru tētahi o koutou ki runga
i te poari o Te Urewera, ka tautoko koe i te pire?
Me pēnei pea te kōrero ka maru ake tā mātou pai i te
tika.
Okay. Any other questions from members?
China, you've given us a very good written submission as well as your verbal
submission. Thank you. I think it's reiterating what your
whanaunga has submitted as well. So, kia ora mai for your submission
today. Kia ora.
And the Māori version will be easy.
Kia ira anō au question.
All right.
Craig Atkinson.
Welcome, Craig.
Kia ora.
I had a chat with Craig earlier on. He has traveled over two hours to be with us
today . So kia ora mai, Craig, for making the effort to come here, and you've
contributed to many treaty settlements, and I'm appreciative of that.
But you understand the process here.
We've got five minutes allocated for your time, so haere atu.
Kia ora. First of all, I'd just like to acknowledge from the mountains, the hills,
the lands, the rivers, the streams that make the magnificent place that
we sit here today. I'd like to acknowledge all the people that have gone
before,
that had the persecution and the tyranny from the Crown,
all the people that have been left to fight for years and years and years in a
process that's not fit process, a process that divides
Māori, and that. I'd like to acknowledge all the people that go
after, all the young people, as we see running around, and this is what
these treaty claims, I believe, is about, what is left for Māori,
and that to end poverty, to end homelessness, and that there's
so much we could achieve from these treaty claims and so much we fail.
And of the basis of it, the Crown divides the local iwis,
hapūs. They have them arguing amongst themselves that they can't
come to an agreement because it's not a full process. That's part of your game.
You sit there and sort of smile and say, "Oh, yeah," but
it's yourselves that do it. You rubber stamp it.
You're all under contract. You're all paid very well by the Crown and that.
So there is no neutrality here. There is
numerous conflicts of interest by the committee,
and the process, and the figure that you come up with,
0.07%, that they get
anything that's under a zero is a negative in my
view. The land is never commercially
feasible. The only land that you ever give back
is actually
what will cost the Crown money
So it's just balancing its book by returning, which is a token gesture.
The apology is just not
acknowledging, an apology is not worth nothing. It's got no value whatsoever.
So yeah, the entire process is flawed for
Maori. At the end of it, there is no natural justice.
And it's all set to divide Maori and things.
We've just seen farmers have a payout of 500,000 per
household handed out. How much can we say each
iwi here, each individual person, how much is this Treaty claim
going to put in their family? I'd say zero.
None of them will ever see any of it.
So for that point, it doesn't empower Maori and it does nothing
more than just put that this is just another breach of what the Treaty was
actually set out in the beginning.
The other alternate to the hardline negotiation says return
our land.
Mm-hmm.
Pay the rent that you owe on it. Pay the penalties on that.
Take the prison sentence for the land that's stolen,
because that is what would happen if Maori took anything.
If there was one acre of land taken by Maori, that would be
returned
and that back, there would be a financial burden and
there'd be a prison sentence. There's none of that here.
One rule for one and a different rule for others, and it's been like that from day
dot. So that is my submission. I fully support the
doctor's submission.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
Any questions for Craig?
No, call me.
You stay.
I have a question, Craig. I
think a lot of us feel
the truth in what you say about the hypocrisy of the
Crown and how
the Crown still has the
rule book, holds the rule book and determines the conditions
of the settlement.
But I want to ask you one thing is
when we stand in the house and acknowledge the apology
and recognize the wrongs that are now gazetted in black
and white law,
and in unanimity,
the members of the Parliament will stand
and accept the historical account,
accept the
atrocities committed by the Crown
and recognize the truth of that
history.
I can assure you that
we do it genuinely,
and that is not in any way to diminish
the still
massive flaws in the Crown settlement process.
But that apology, I believe, is given in good faith
and that acknowledgement from us as members of Parliament
is genuine.
You're all under contract to the Crown. You're all paid by the Crown.
Your first point of the contract is to protect the
Crown's assets.
It's not what I'm-
If that's where it comes though, mate, at the end of it, 28, 24
million is an insult.
I
agree.
Any last questions of Craig?
Craig, thank you very much for being here.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Have a lovely day.
Okay, now we have the, it's the written submission of
Ida? Ida?
Ida.
Ida. Thank you. Ida Hayder. And I believe you
are,
are you speaking on behalf of or are you Ida?
I'm sorry, I've just got a message here that it might be James that was going to be
presenting that.
Welcome. Welcome today, and once again, we've had an opportunity to
read your written submission, and we've got approximately five minutes allocated
for your time, so use it as you see fit. Thank you.
David.
Mm-hmm.
Just an acknowledgement
for all of you coming in today in person.
This is a submission on behalf of
our whanau really, submitted by my father, James.
He sends his apologies, can't make it through today.
Apologies from my tuakana James,
who can't make it through today.
So karia ma teina
he p**a te korero.
And
I also live closer.
I'm living in Wairoa.
And for full transparency and to acknowledge some of the korero,
particularly from Rahata,
I also sit as a director at Tatau Tatau o Te Wairoa Trust
for Hine Manuheri and I have been at the
korero that was had with Tatau Tatau and
Pare Taupoki, Ngati Ruapani, Moa Wha Pare Moana Trust.
Hua no.
With the submission here at the heart of the submission is the
issue of overlapping interests,
if interest is the right word. We've talked about in the
negotiations responsibilities,
and so this is coming from our
Hine Manuheri whakapapa but in our whanau through
my grandmother Francis. We whakapapa
to Ruapani,
we whakapapa to Ngai Tuhoe, and we whakapapa to Hine
Manuheri. Hine Manuheri being
Ngati Kahungunu ki Te Wairoa. Whakapapa there,
Kahungunu, Rongo Mai Wahine, Ka P**a Ko Kahukuranui, Ka P**a Ko Hine
ManuheriSo Hinemanuhiri, the granddaughter of Kahungunu, ka
moe of Hinemanuhiri ki a Pukarau, the son of Ruapani.
So this is winding back several hundred years
now.
And so we're at the whakapapa, and for our whanau, yeah,
two feet in three camps.
So
there was a map attached. I don't know if it came through kaupae. Yep.
So the map was really speaking to that overlapping interest
korou again. And these
are historical traditional boundaries that, again, go back
hundreds of years.
More recently, in more recent history,
these boundaries were talked about in countless
hearings and court cases and legislation
processes dating back 1875. I think one of the earliest in the
Wairau hearing,
where these Kahungunu, these
Hinemanuhiri boundaries were put on the table.
They've been disputed, they've been debated, they've been accepted and
negated over all those years since 1875.
Tai nauk te nei wa to
this day. But it just is to
really just show how significant this
whenua is. Putangaui,
Waikaremoana,
specifically those six DOC reserves which sit on the
Wairau side of the lake, on southern side.
So they sit
on the Wairau side of the lake. And
those are where you see those overlapping
boundaries with Tuhou, with Tamaterangi, Makaro,
Inganga, Pupuni,
Parirua. So
that's the issue with
the six DOC reserves in particular.
And the question being how can the Crown make a decision
ignoring Hinemanuhiri's whakapapa
and
responsibilities to those
six DOC reserves, which sit across four southern
blocks. Which if we talk about acknowledgement and apologies, which
I totally acknowledge the apology and the acknowledgements that are sitting
currently within the Ruapani settlement, but though that
acknowledgement also sits in the Wairau settlement as well,
acknowledgement of the four southern blocks being confiscated
from Hinemanuhiri. And here we are now,
2018, what's that? Eight years after our settlement in Wairau, saying you don't
have any interest now in those southern blocks where those six DOC reserves
sit. So that's the question.
We talk about Lake Waikaremoana lakebed, another example of where the
Crown, in 1971 at least, recognized Hinemanuhiri interest
in the Waikaremoana lakebed, which still exists to this
day. So, how does the Crown reconcile that
interest here and then not recognize any interests in
those six DOC reserves? So that's
what the submission talks to. There's some historical content
there around Makaro. He must have been a favorite, bit of a mōkai of his
koroua, of his poro, because there's very many sites around here named
after Makaro. Taitamakaro is our outpost.
That's our boundary marker halfway between here and Rahuhunga.
Taitamakaro. You've got Tahitiamakaro,
Teuriamakaro, Teanamakaro, Tekuriamakaro, upwards of
half a dozen sites of significance named after Makaro.
Just to talk more specifically towards the bill
and the deed of settlement.
Financial redress
is pitiful
at 24 million,
given the history that we're all coming up to speed with now of
what's happened here over the last 160 years.
So $24 million.
I think the Waikaremoana hydroelectric power
scheme would probably earn that in one financial quarter.
So in three months, this is what the hydroelectric scheme here would make, $24
million. So I think it's
woefully inadequate,
and needs to be reconsidered. I do acknowledge our
negotiation group for Ruapani. It's a futile space, financial redress
for all of our iwi, Putangau.
With the land, all the land, grateful.
Grateful for the land back. Thank you for the land back.
We'll
accept that as an installment and a part
payment,
as in time
we get it all back.
Kia ora.
So we want all the land back. But we're grateful for
what's been put on the table here. And of course, some of those six DOC
reserves were not on the table for during the time of Wairau
settlement. So we asked, "Well, why didn't you guys sort it then?" Well,
that wasn't offered to us.
And the Te Urewera board,
questions there. Questions around the
addition of any whenua really to the Te Urewera board.
Got issues around administration,
accountancy-- accountability, sorry, for the Te Urewera board.
Issues around
the Crown funding of the Te Urewera board,
and the governance of the Te Urewera
board. Given that there's been--
Not confident that the Te Urewera board is managing what the whenua already has on
behalf of Te Urewera, te tangata. I'm not sure if the Te Urewera board's actually
really delivering what the whenua already has and whether we should be thinking
about adding more to it.
We need to look at
is the Crown committed to the Te Urewera Act and the obligations under the
Te Urewera Act? Are they reallyDelivering on
what the Tutuweta. Tutuweta is the concept of everything.
Are they committed to it? I'm not seeing that yet.
I'm questioning the position of the three Crown director appointments on that
board,
whether or not there needs to be-- It's an opportunity to look at those positions.
And is there a position
at that table? If we look at who's there for our
whānau, we have Tūhoe, we have Ruapani.
Is there-- Do we need a wāhine at the table?
And should Hinemanu Huri have a seat at that table
and bring in her reinforcements to help deliver the mahi?
If we look at Tutuweta legal personhood born in
2014, he's 12 now.
Do we need a wāhine to come in there, Hinemanu Huri,
to tautoko and help raise this tama
and bring in her reinforcements to help deliver the work?
At the moment, it's not happening.
I don't feel pest control, biodiversity, those things,
highly questionable at the moment.
Recommendation is to
reset the financial redress,
think of a better figure and double it.
To pause, rethink on the
addition to the Tutuweta board,
and re-look at it and perhaps a review.
And also that set up of the governance. Is there a position for Hinemanu Huri?
Rather than
create that later, this is the time to sort it now, and I feel that it's needed.
And finally, with the six stock reserves, sorry, but there has to be a pause.
You'll see there's a lot of interest here. There's a lot at stake.
This is an opportunity. Maia talked about our Te Tau Pounamu
between Hinemanu Huri and Ngāi Tūhoe, 1828,
and it's all across where those stock reserves sit.
This is an opportunity for us to fully embrace that
Te Tau Pounamu, that peace accord.
It's not about the Crown making that decision and sorting
out
for us, but those stock reserves are an opportunity to create some lasting legacy,
a lasting enduring legacy,
and to bury the hatchet,
at the very least between Ngāi Tūhoe and Hinemanu Huri, and deliver
some-- start doing the mahi. And
leaving a lasting legacy for our tamariki mokopuna
that we talk about in these settings
often. Yeah. Whētea. Whētea. Ka kite ano.
Kia ora. Kia ora. Again, questions are there.
Any questions?
Good submission, and thank you for the map also.
It gives us who are foreign to your whenua a
greater understanding of exactly what you're talking about itself.
So we appreciate you coming on behalf of your father and your presentation
today. Kia ora.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Right.
So there's an opportunity here for Te Pari Taikuki
to
give us closing comments if they so wish. Yep. Ae.
Kia ora.
And just so you know,
Kara-
Yeah.
Sorry, my apologies.
Kia ora.
So just so you understand,
have an opportunity now. Ae. You also have an opportunity at the end
of the Wellington submission process as well,
because it's important for us that we get a response for what we hear through that
itself. So once again, we have about 10 minutes or thereabouts to hear from
you at this closing of this opportunity.
So, ana.
Now, Wairateia, start please.
So kia ora, Mr. Chair. Kia ora committee members.
So my name is Wairateia Moe. I am employed by the Ngāti Ruapani Mai
Wakaremoana Trustees, and I have whakapapa to Ruapani
through my puku h**e and my grandfather, Hi
Kaiata Moe.
So I want to respond to some of the questions that have arised in
the submissions. So historical account is Tūhoe
centric.
This historical account truthfully describes the atrocities suffered by the
Ruapani people. The historical account is a shared
historical narrative because the histories of Tūhoe, Ruapani,
and Kahungunu are deeply intertwined through whakapapa
and shared events. So a degree of overlap in the
narrative is unavoidable and historically accurate.
I also want to reiterate that we rejected the Crown
translator and insisted on using our own
translators for the historical
account, namely Newton Lambert, Maia Rurihe, and
Patrick McGarvey, who certified the translation.
These men are Ruapani and they are Tūhoe.
You cannot separate that. To suggest otherwise would be
like trying to chop them in half and saying, "Okay, guys,
I only want the Ruapani part of you to translate the historical account.
The Tūhoe part can go and sit in the naughty corner."
So
that would be messy. It would take twice as long to translate, and we would
still be negotiating that account today.
So yes, calling this
as Tūhoe centric is not wrong. As our elders have said,
and as Newton has told me
what the elders said, that "I am Ruapani and I am Tūhoe." You
cannot split the two.
Okay.
So this bill is fit for purpose. Throughout the negotiation
settlement process, we have maintained an open door policy.
We have consistently brought our uri along on the settlement journey
at the monthly Hapū hui via our social media platforms, our
website, and our pānui. And we met with uri
individually on several occasions at their
bequest.We also consulted and engaged with our
neighboring whanaunga, overlapping groups at their
tari, online, in Wellington, and at our marae.
We also wrote a letter of intent to our overlapping groups,
how we will come and work together on shared interests.
I also want to remind Mr. Haida that we
agreed that we needed to strengthen our
relationships. We didn't deny that, and we
agreed that those whakapapa questions that
rise
do not belong in the settlement process.
They belong outside of this process.
This bill is fit for purpose because it does not deny anyone
access. Everyone who has whakapapa to Te Urewera will continue to
have access to their lands, to continue their customary
rights to hunt and connect to their whenua.
The Urewera Act is inclusive and welcomes everybody to
visit Te Urewera, but a PSGE does
not have automatic rights here.
The whenua, the six reserves that everyone has claimed on
are here, they're not in Wellington.
So the people presenting there, why are they not here talking to
us directly on the whenua? Because that is
tikanga.
This bill is fit for purpose because the majority,
82.82% of ballot votes cast on the resolution
voted agreed. The voter return was
72.35% with 492 votes cast.
79.88% voted online, with
20.12% voted by post or in person at the
information hui.
We now hold
the highest voter rate in the mosu, and that was through
hard work through the hapū here.
If we pause this settlement, then the Crown will undermine our whanau who
attended these information hui, which none of those outside
you have listened today or Te Pari Taupoki did not
attend.
This bill is fit for purpose because Ruapani Waikaremoana have waited long
enough,
and to pause this settlement on these flimsy AI
multi-templated submissions would be wrong and would be a dark
stain on the Crown. This bill is fit for purpose because
it is designed with intention, and it is well considered,
and it was built on the aspirations of our uri.
But more importantly, it was built so we can build a Waikaremoana that is
prosperous and vibrant for our mokopuna.
This bill is not fit to discuss our whakapapa.
That is,
as I've mentioned before, outside the settlement.
We agreed on that in our hui with
our neighboring whanaunga group.
This bill cannot be paused because we have work to do.
Today, we need to learn to put our own personal grievances
aside because our mokopuna cannot be left dealing with
this
30 years down the track.
And in my final remark, I want to remind
our whanaunga here who have attended today, on 28th of
February 2026, we signed the deed of settlement right out there.
And present were our Ruapani iwi, Ngā
Manatū ke,
and they supported our settlement and support our
settlement actively.
Kia ora.
Hi. Just to clear up the
difference between
my Waikaremoana and Ki Waikaremoana.
Our claim is under three tipuna, three Ruapani
tipuna, Pukehore, Tuwai, and Hinekura.
Ruapani had many
children, twins,
and
grandchildren, twins.
And so he had a lot of descendants, a lot of uri.
Most of those uri live outside
Waikaremoana. They are not ahika.
They have no tūrangawaewae here.
The last speaker,
Ina Four,
he has got whakapapa. He's got whakapapa to
Pukehore and to Hinekura.
So we specifically chose those three tipuna
because that's what our clothes had used when they first
put the claims in for the land.
They were under Pukehore,
Tuwai, and his sister, Hinewao.
But we
chose Hinekura because
Hinewao's uri and Tuwai's uri
intermarried about
three generations
down.
Those Ngati Ruapani outside of Waikaremoana,
they married into
Hinemanuhiri,
Tamaterangi,
the descendants from Pukehore,
Ngati Makoro,
and Ngati
InanaThe
descendants of
Pareoro
gradually married into Tuhoe.
But in the Tuhoe settlement, there's
50% of Tepungere,
Ngai Tarawhaou. 50% stays with
Ngati Pahauwera and 50% under Tuhoe.
And they are under our
claim, too.
And as stated, I think that's the
answer. Quite a few points, quite succinct.
No reira, kia ora tātou.
Kia ora, Nutty. Any
points of clarity or questions? Yes, Oriini.
Pātai tāku.
He iwi motu ake a Ruapani?
Pēhea?
He iwi a Ruapani?
I roto o Waikaremoana, pēhe.
Nō te mea ko ngā
mārena o ngā
uri a
Pokehore,
a Tuwai rāua ko Hineki ka moe ki roto
o Tūhoe.
Te kōhuritanga ki Te Anau tikitiki, nā tērā
kōhuritanga,
ka panaia e Tūhoe
ngā uri o Āti Ruapani
nā rātou
tērā kōhuru.
Nā, ka panaia atu kia hoki atu ki
tō rātou
tahakanu.
I waihotia, ko ngā uri o
Ngāti Ruapani i moe ki roto o Tūhoe.
Ko te mea hoki,
Te Anau tikitiki, te kōhuritanga i reira,
ko wētahi o Tūhoe,
ngā kuia, koroua, tamariki mokopuna
i mate ai i reira.
Koirā
koaka.
A tōna wā,
nā
Te Puhurewa,
Te Ahuru,
te taha o Waikaremoana,
o Tūhoe, Ruapani
me te taha ki a Kauranu ko Ngārangi Mataeo.
Nā rātou i te kōrero i whakamoia ko ngā
maunga
kia whānau ake ko Te Pai mō Ākitonga.
Arā, te whakamoia ko Te Kuhatārewa,
tā Kauranu,
te maunga wahine.
Taha ki a Tūhoe, Ruapani, ko Tiriokaunu.
Arā,
koirā.
I toko atu tērā pātai i runga i taku hiahia kia mōhio.
Ano te pātai,
he rā he taka ka hiri mai a Ruapani ki Waiora ki
te toro mai ki te kāwana me te kī, "Ano,
he take Tiriti anō. Kāore wa ake he
ture tironga, he claim anō." Nō reira,
anō te pātai, he totara wāhi rua ngā Ruapani.
Mā Ruapani ake tēnei,
mā
Ruapani ki Waikaremoana, Tūhoe? He rā he taka ka haere mai a
Ruapani ki tētahi atu tara ki te tono kia
whakatikaina ngā mate kino a te kāwana ki runga ki a
Ruapani?
He
aha tēnei mea? Kāore au i kitea tēnei mea he totara
wāhi rua.
Ko te totara wāhi rua
he mea ake ki roto i tētahi whānau,
tētahi hapū, tētahi iwi.
Engari, he aroha ko Ruapani, ngā uri o Ruapani mai Waikaremoana.
E kīia nei he iwi.
Kei te noho a
Ruapani mai Waikaremoana i te taha o Tūhoe.
Ā, i raro i te mana motuhake o
Tūhoe.
Nā Tūhoe i tautoko,
nā Tūhoe i hāpai ake i tō
mātou haerenga i tēnei huarahi mā.
Ā, kāore atu e mea atu ki taku whānaunga, a
Ira.
Ēnari,
tōna whakapapa kei roto i wa i Waikaremoana.
Tōna taha ki
Ngāti Hinemanu,
ki Ngāti Kau.
Koinā.
Any last questions from you just?
If not, thank you very much
for your closing comments there. If I just make some closing
comments myself. I
often look at these treaty settlement processes and the part that we play.
We, as members of Parliament, are here for a
small amount of time
to try and do the best we canIn what I call a
process that's perfectly imperfect.
And
as we've heard, I empathize with people saying that the
redress is a scratch of the surface.
It's a pittance of actually the wrongdoings of the past.
And we see this all over the motu, all over the place
back where I'm from, the Taranaki. We've seen it all there.
And I'm very mindful personally, that this process here is
about providing a new beginning to
rebuild from everything that has been lost, and that presents
its challenges
in itself, and the resource that comes from treaty settlements
can be easily argued as just a pittance of what it takes to
begin that journey.
But a bigger concern of mine is we
often, if not always, hear from whanau nui
of a settlement where there's unrest
between your people.
And it concerns me that the Crown is endeavoring to
start again
with its responsibilities and allow iwi to
rebuild, but are we sometimes
causing a new rauraru, a new
problem within iwi? I'm very mindful of that, and I ask that
question about this, and I accept the
arduous journey that's been had to get your settlement to this point.
We
play but a part in this process,
and it's always valuable for us to be number one
on the whenua. And I take your point,
Waireti, about korero being here on your whenua, kanui ki
kanui.
And we have to go back down to Wellington,
I suppose to discuss, to query, to ask
questions of people to try and help
you to start again. And that is a
challenge, and it's like I said, it's imperfect where we're
here.
But it's so important for us to hear from
everybody, your whanau ma, and the different points of view,
because you don't get that from reading documents.
It's so important to hear and to see
and to feel the empathy, feel the emotion of what this is
on both sides.
Because we have a job here that is so important.
A treaty settlement is an important part in your history.
It will be looked back on in this process
here. But it's just a point of time.
It's actually the future and what you're doing intergenerationally for
everybody else in the future that we are mindful of trying to giving
you a pathway, giving you some more open doors to be able to begin that new
journey,
and it doesn't come without its...
How would you call it? Our challenges
and emotions that are in, because I think we all here reflect
on our own home whenua and our own home
iwi and apu with what they've gone through
in that. So it is quite an emotional journey that I say personally for
us to actually go through this here.
But in closing, thank you
for the openness of everybody that submitted today on both
sides of the argument itself. Thank you
for being respectful to one another.
I actually was remiss in saying at the beginning, I always try to say it's
important you use the rugby term, play the ball, not the
man.
This is about the kaupapa. It's not about the personalities, and
as far as I could see today, that was respectfully done by all the
submitters, so I appreciate that-
Yeah
... in itself.
Also, it's obviously appropriate for me to thank all the
people that have made this so welcoming for us to come and
conduct our official responsibilities here
on your whenua here. Thank you, Craig, for making such a long journey to
participate, too. I acknowledge that. Thank you, too. Yeah.
And thank you to the staff. The staff play an important part of making our
job easier,
and also the people that keep us safe in this environment that you've
got here. Thank you for my first opportunity to be here.
You have a beautiful part of the world.
It was a lovely journey that we had this morning from Wairoa and through
your wonderful valleys to here. It's a beautiful place, and I hope to bring my
wider whanau here back here at some stage in the future as well because it's
a special place with that. But with that, I bring this official part of
our proceedings today to a close, and may I ask
you perhaps to say maybe a closing karakia for us today.
Kia ora.
Ka oti ake i te kakaha, ka hokia mai te mauri o te korero ki a koe, ki te
hau kāinga, ki te
āhika. Ka whakatau i a koutou, ko koutou whakatangatu.
Kei a Waireti pea ngā whakamārama mō ngā whakahaere ā muri ake
nei. Me tatari kia mā ngā koutou
tohutohu. Heoi ano,
rawe ngā whakahaere a koutou, ngā
minitā, ngā kaihautū o te Kāwanan.
He miomatuakore, heke i hoko e pau ki te whenua, ko Papatūānuku te
aitana ma. Mauitikitiki a Taranga.
Ka p**a ko te uwha, ka p**a ko ngā kaupapa o tōna ao.
He mauri, he tapu, he ihi ana. Ka p**a ko te iratara ta ki te pae ao, ki
te ao mārama. Tihei Mauri Ora!
Kia ora mai, and kia ora tatou katoa